Unique network flows (#304)
ros2/design: articles/unique_network_flows.md

The link P1-S1 requires low-latency QoS from the 5G network, say a maximum delay of 5ms. P2-S2 requires default latency QoS i.e., 300ms. Then, by construction, since the flow identifiers of P1-S1 and P2-S2 links are the same, they cannot be assigned the required QoS by the network. Both P1-S1 and P2-S2 can either be assigned QoS with 5ms delay or with 300ms delay. The former case represents a waste of network resources, the latter case degrades performance.

## Proposed Solution

Our proposal to solve the problem is to make the flow identifiers of publishers and subscribers in communicating nodes unique using existing IP header fields.

We believe there are at least three architectural options to implement unique network flows. These are shown in the figure below.

![Architecture options for unique network flows](./unique-network-flows-arch-options.png)

### Option 1: Unique flow ID from publisher/subscriber

We construct a new QoS policy called *Network Flow* as a support structure to enable unique identification of flows.

The Network Flow QoS policy is parameterized by just one parameter -- a 32-bit unsigned integer called `flow_id`. The default `flow_id` is zero.

> Each publisher or subscriber that requires a specific QoS from the network is required to set the `flow_id` parameter to value unique within the node. The `flow_id` can be computed internally in the node using simple UID generation schemes (atomic integer counters or random integer sampling without duplicates) or supplied by an external component.

Reviewer: with this option, I think it would be better to provide API such as `generate_network_flow(void)` to user application to generate unique identification. if flow id depends on the implementation, it should ask implementation to allocate and return it to user application.

Author: Good suggestion! The delegation of unique flow ID generation to the RMW is covered by option-2 in the proposal (`network_flow(bool unique_flow = true)`).

The example C++ snippet below shows a node creating a publisher (`pub1`)  and a subscriber (`sub1`) with unique `flow_id` values. Subscriber `sub2` is created with the default Network Flow QoS policy (`flow_id` = 0).

```cpp
auto pub1_qos = rclcpp::QoS(rclcpp::KeepLast(10)).network_flow(0xf4688c52);
pub1 = create_publisher<std_msgs::msg::UInt64>("pub1_topic", pub1_qos);

auto sub1_qos = rclcpp::QoS(rclcpp::KeepLast(1)).network_flow(0x88181c45);
sub1 = create_subscription<std_msgs::msg::String>("sub1_topic", sub1_qos, std::bind(&new_sub1_message, this, _1));

auto sub2_qos = rclcpp::QoS(rclcpp::KeepLast(1));
sub2 = create_subscription<std_msgs::msg::String>("sub2_topic", sub2_qos, std::bind(&new_sub2_message, this, _1));
```

The RMW implementation has several options to convert `flow_id` to a unique flow identifier visible in packet headers. We list three candidate options.

> If the node is communicating using IPv6, then the lower 20-bits of `flow_id` can be transferred to the Flow Label field. This creates a unique 3-tuple.

Reviewer: what if the lower 20-bits are the same? e.g) in the same node, id-A is 0x0badcafe id-B is 0x0bbdcafe. in this case lower 20-bits are the exactly same.

Author: Sharp observation! It would be problematic if the lower 20-bits are the same across two or more unique flow IDs within a node. We expect that the RMW will document how it creates the unique flow ID in the IP header and that the application programmer generates unique flow IDs accordingly. For example, if the RMW documentation says that the unique flow ID is copied over to an N-bit field in the IP header, then the application programmer should generate flow IDs that are N-bit unique. Other suggestions to ensure that unique flow IDs do not overlap are welcome.

Both DDS and non-DDS RMW implementations can trivially set fields in IP headers using native socket API on all ROS2 platforms (Linux, Windows, MacOS). 

### Option 2: Publisher/subscriber delegates flow ID generation to RMW

This is a programmer-friendly alternative that modifies the Network Flow QoS policy to accept a boolean parameter called `unique_flow`. Setting `unique_flow` to `true` instructs the RMW implementation to generate a unique flow identifier for the publisher/subscriber associated with the Network Flow QoS policy. By default, `unique_flow` is set to `false`.

The RMW implementation generates a `flow_id` internally first before writing it to an appropriate field in packet headers similar to Option-1.

Generating the `flow_id` internally is a matter of implementing a simple hashing functions parameterized by existing unique identifiers for publishers/subscribers within a node (for example, the RTPS entity ID).

> A suitable interface should be created for publishers/subscribers to obtain the unique flow ID created by the RMW. We prefer to use community help to create this interface.

Reviewer: Why user application needs to know the flow ID? debug information? I think that user application inputs QoS requirement, and the rest can be taken care by implementation.

Author: We assume that the application specifies required QoS to the network controller (e.g. Network Exposure Function in the 5GS). So it should know the unique flow ID. We prefer to avoid coupling the RMW to the network controller to obtain the unique flow ID.

Reviewer: okay i misunderstood at some point, now i see. thanks.

author: '[Ananya Muddukrishna, Ericsson AB](https://github.com/anamud)'
published: true
---

{:toc}

# {{ page.title }}

<div class="abstract" markdown="1">
{{ page.abstract }}
</div>

Original Author: {{ page.author }}

# Unique Network Flows

For performance, ROS2 applications require careful selection of QoS for publishers and subscriptions. Although networks offer various QoS options, ROS2 publishers and subscriptions are unable to use them due to non-unique flows. As a result, ROS2 publishers and subscriptions can only hope to obtain undifferentiated QoS from networks. This ultimately degrades the performance potential of ROS2 applications and wastes networking infrastructure investments.

We propose unique network flows for ROS2 publishers and subscriptions. Our proposal is easy to use, convenient to implement, and minimal. Plus, it respects non-DDS-middleware-friendly concerns in ROS2.

In this document, we first describe essential background concepts. After that we precisely state the problem and propose a solution to the problem. Existing solutions are compared in the end.

## Background

> IP networking [1] is the pre-dominant inter-networking technology used today. Ethernet, WiFi, 4G/5G telecommunication all rely on IP networking.

Reviewer 2: @anamud nit: 
```suggestion
IP networking [1] is the predominant inter-networking technology used today. Ethernet, WiFi, 4G/5G telecommunication all rely on IP networking.
```
? It's the first time I've predominant written this way, so maybe I'm just not familiar with this particularly spelling.

Author: Its a typo. Thanks for spotting it. I have a nasty habit of over-using hyphens.

Author: Fixed typo in separate [commit](https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/304/commits/37d444786932c06be71a54f5d8daad0806bd9756) below.
